README.md, before:

# DIZutils <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="120" />

<!-- badges: start -->
[![CRAN Status Badge](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version-ago/DIZutils)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DIZutils)
[![Cran Checks](https://cranchecks.info/badges/worst/DIZutils)](https://cran.r-project.org/web/checks/check_results_DIZutils.html)
[![](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/grand-total/DIZutils?color=blue)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DIZutils)
[![](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/last-month/DIZutils?color=blue)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DIZutils)
[![Dependencies](https://tinyverse.netlify.com/badge/DIZutils)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DIZutils)
[![R CMD Check via {tic}](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils/workflows/R%20CMD%20Check%20via%20{tic}/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils)
[![linting](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils/workflows/lint/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils)
[![test-coverage](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils/workflows/test-coverage/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/miracum/misc-dizutils/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/miracum/misc-dizutils)
<!-- badges: end -->

The R package `DIZutils` provides utility functions used for the R package development infrastructure inside the data integration centers ('DIZ') to standardize and facilitate repetitive tasks such as setting up a database connection or issuing notification messages and to avoid redundancy.

## Installation

You can install `DIZutils` directly from CRAN:

```r
install.packages("DIZutils")
```

The development version can be installed using

```r
install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("miracum/misc-dizutils", ref = "development")
```

## Basic functions

### db_connection

The function `DIZutils::db_connection` provides one simple interface for connecting to various types of databases. It reads necessary connection settings from the active environment (see below how to use the function `set_env_vars` to set environment variables).

The following database types are currently supported:

* postgres (via the R package [`RPostgres`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=RPostgres))
* oracle (via the R packages [`RJDBC`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=RJDBC) and [`DBI`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=DBI/))

#### postgres

The following environment variables need to be set to the active environment in order to connect with a postgres database with "i2b2" as name of the database to connect with:

| Variable          | Description                                                               |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| I2B2_HOST         | The hostname/ IP address of your pg instance.                             |
| I2B2_DBNAME       | The name of the pg-database.                                              |
| I2B2_PORT         | The port, your pg postgres instance is running on.                        |
| I2B2_USER         | The name of the 'I2B2_USER'.                                              |
| I2B2_PASSWORD     | The password of the 'I2B2_USER' of your pg instance.                      |

To establish the connection, please set those environment variables accordingly and execute the following command. The argument `db_name` is used to detect the corresponding environment variables and thus must match with the environment variables' prefix.

```r
db_con <- DIZutils::db_connection(
    system_name = "i2b2",
    db_type = "postgres"
  )
```

#### oracle

The following environment variables need to be set to the active environment in order to connect with an oracle database:

| Variable          | Description                                                               |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| MYORACLEDB_HOST         | The hostname/ IP address of your oracle instance.                   |
| MYORACLEDB_DBNAME       | The name of the oracle-database.                                    |
| MYORACLEDB_DRIVER       | The path to the oracle jdbc driver.                                 |
| MYORACLEDB_SID          | The SID of the oracle-database.                                     |
| MYORACLEDB_PORT         | The port, your oracle postgres instance is running on.              |
| MYORACLEDB_USER         | The name of the 'MYORACLEDB_USER'.                                  |
| MYORACLEDB_PASSWORD     | The password of the 'MYORACLEDB_USER' of your oracle instance.      |

To establish the connection, please set those environment variables accordingly and execute the following command. The argument `db_name` is used to detect the corresponding environment variables and thus must match with the environment variables' prefix. Furthermore, an ojdbc*.jar-file needs to be provided via the function's `lib_path` argument.

```r
db_con <- DIZutils::db_connection(
  system_name = "myoracledb",
  db_type = "oracle",
  lib_path = "path/to/ojdbc*.jar"
)
```

For further details on how to set the specific environment variables using a configuration file, please refer to the documentation in the [`DIZtools`](https://github.com/miracum/misc-diztools#setenv_file) R package.

## More Infos

* about MIRACUM: <https://www.miracum.org/>
* about the Medical Informatics Initiative: <https://www.medizininformatik-initiative.de/index.php/de>

Commit message:

fix: fixed method to specify schema to be queried for postgres db-connections

README.md, after:

# DIZutils <img src="man/figures/logo.png" align="right" width="120" />

<!-- badges: start -->
[![CRAN Status Badge](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version-ago/DIZutils)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DIZutils)
[![Cran Checks](https://cranchecks.info/badges/worst/DIZutils)](https://cran.r-project.org/web/checks/check_results_DIZutils.html)
[![](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/grand-total/DIZutils?color=blue)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DIZutils)
[![](http://cranlogs.r-pkg.org/badges/last-month/DIZutils?color=blue)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DIZutils)
[![Dependencies](https://tinyverse.netlify.com/badge/DIZutils)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=DIZutils)
[![R CMD Check via {tic}](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils/workflows/R%20CMD%20Check%20via%20{tic}/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils)
[![linting](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils/workflows/lint/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils)
[![test-coverage](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils/workflows/test-coverage/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/miracum/misc-dizutils)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/miracum/misc-dizutils/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://app.codecov.io/gh/miracum/misc-dizutils)
<!-- badges: end -->

The R package `DIZutils` provides utility functions used for the R package development infrastructure inside the data integration centers ('DIZ') to standardize and facilitate repetitive tasks such as setting up a database connection or issuing notification messages and to avoid redundancy.

## Installation

You can install `DIZutils` directly from CRAN:

```r
install.packages("DIZutils")
```

The development version can be installed using

```r
install.packages("remotes")
remotes::install_github("miracum/misc-dizutils", ref = "development")
```

## Basic functions

### db_connection

The function `DIZutils::db_connection` provides one simple interface for connecting to various types of databases. It reads necessary connection settings from the active environment (see below how to use the function `set_env_vars` to set environment variables).

The following database types are currently supported:

* postgres (via the R package [`RPostgres`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=RPostgres))
* oracle (via the R packages [`RJDBC`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=RJDBC) and [`DBI`](https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=DBI/))

#### postgres

The following environment variables need to be set to the active environment in order to connect with a postgres database with "i2b2" as name of the database to connect with:

| Variable          | Description                                                               |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| I2B2_HOST         | The hostname/ IP address of your pg instance.                             |
| I2B2_DBNAME       | The name of the pg-database.                                              |
| I2B2_PORT         | The port, your pg postgres instance is running on.                        |
| I2B2_USER         | The name of the 'I2B2_USER'.                                              |
| I2B2_PASSWORD     | The password of the 'I2B2_USER' of your pg instance.                      |
| I2B2_SCHEMA       | (optional) The database schema on which queries should be performed.      |

To establish the connection, please set those environment variables accordingly and execute the following command. The argument `db_name` is used to detect the corresponding environment variables and thus must match with the environment variables' prefix.

```r
db_con <- DIZutils::db_connection(
    system_name = "i2b2",
    db_type = "postgres"
  )
```

#### oracle

The following environment variables need to be set to the active environment in order to connect with an oracle database:

| Variable          | Description                                                               |
| ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| MYORACLEDB_HOST         | The hostname/ IP address of your oracle instance.                   |
| MYORACLEDB_DBNAME       | The name of the oracle-database.                                    |
| MYORACLEDB_DRIVER       | The path to the oracle jdbc driver.                                 |
| MYORACLEDB_SID          | The SID of the oracle-database.                                     |
| MYORACLEDB_PORT         | The port, your oracle postgres instance is running on.              |
| MYORACLEDB_USER         | The name of the 'MYORACLEDB_USER'.                                  |
| MYORACLEDB_PASSWORD     | The password of the 'MYORACLEDB_USER' of your oracle instance.      |

To establish the connection, please set those environment variables accordingly and execute the following command. The argument `db_name` is used to detect the corresponding environment variables and thus must match with the environment variables' prefix. Furthermore, an ojdbc*.jar-file needs to be provided via the function's `lib_path` argument.

```r
db_con <- DIZutils::db_connection(
  system_name = "myoracledb",
  db_type = "oracle",
  lib_path = "path/to/ojdbc*.jar"
)
```

For further details on how to set the specific environment variables using a configuration file, please refer to the documentation in the [`DIZtools`](https://github.com/miracum/misc-diztools#setenv_file) R package.

## More Infos

* about MIRACUM: <https://www.miracum.org/>
* about the Medical Informatics Initiative: <https://www.medizininformatik-initiative.de/index.php/de>
